Project in High Dimensional Data Analysis 2021

A report in PDF (and an Markdown ‘rmd’ file) has to submitted.

Part I

In this part, you have to summarize (in 3 pages max) Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
and SVD (Singular Value Decomposition) described in Section 14.5.1 of Chapter 14 of the
book "The Elements of Statistical Learning" by Trevor Hastie Robert Tibshirani Jerome
Friedman.
Be pedagogical, act as if you were explaining PCA and SVD to a non-initiated person.

Part II (team work)

In this part, you will apply linear regression, PCA and SVD using a real dataset and R
software (for PCA use the packages FactoMineR, factoextra) and R Markdown.
The file 'HDDAdataexam2021.csv' on the drive contains data we collected together. The
seven columns correspond to the following variables.
- 'Phone' is the number of minutes an AIMS student spends watching the screen of his/her
phone per day;
- 'SocialNetworks' is the number of minutes an AIMS student spends on social networks
per day;
- 'EcoFriendly' is a dummy taking the value 1 if the student considers himself/herself as
being an eco-friendly person, and zero otherwise;
- 'Happiness' is the happiness score of an AIMS student on a scale of 10 (the most
unhappy score is 1 and the happiest is 10);
- 'Walk' is the number of kilometers an AIMS student walks a day;
- 'InstagramRatio' is the Instagram follower/following ratio of an AIMS student, i.e.
'InstagramRatio' = 'Instagram followers' / ('People followed on Instagram' +1).II-1
Export the dataset ‘HDDAdataexam2021.csv' to R and create a dataframe named
‘dataset’. Do a PCA of the above variables in the dataframe named ‘dataset’. Interpret the
results.

II-2
Answer the questions below. Give details and interpretation of results for questions
2 to 10.
1) Construct the following variables and add them to the dataframe ‘dataset'
- 'LowInstagram' is a dummy taking the value 1 if 'InstagramRatio' is less than 0.5, and
zero otherwise;
- 'HighInstagram' is a dummy taking the value 1 if 'InstagramRatio' is greater than 2, and
zero otherwise;
2) We would like to investigate the smartphone addiction of AIMS students. Do a multiple
regression with 'Phone' as dependent variable (Y) and the following independent
(predictors) variables: 'SocialNetworks', 'Happiness', 'Walk', 'LowInstagram', and
'HighInstagram'.
3) Is the regression model in 1) useful in predicting 'Phone' time?.
Indication: if the P-value of the test of the anova table (of nullity of all coefficients except
the constant) is less than the critical level (usually 5%) then a linear model is not useful.
4) In the regression of 1), does 'SocialNetworks' significantly influence 'Phone'? 
Indication: a predictor variable influences the response variable Y if the student test of
nullity of its coefficient is not accepted.
5) According to the regression in 1), does 'Happiness' help reduce the time AIM students
spend on their phone?
Indication: a predictor variable has a negative impact on the response variable Y if its
coefficient is significantly negative.
6) Consider the regression output in 1) and two AIMS students A and B who provide
exactly the same answers (120; 4; 15) for the variables 'SocialNetworks', 'Happiness' and'Walk' respecrtively. Student A has an 'InstagramRatio' of 2.1 and Student B has a
'InstagramRatio' of 0.4. Give the predicted phone time for students A and B, respectively,
denoted Phone(A) and Phone(B).
Indication: use ‘predit.lm’
7) Do a backward stepwise regression until you only have significant predictors left at the
5% significance level (it means delete one by one non-significant predictors beginning by
the most non-significant).
8) Choose the model among those you obtained in 1) and 7) that is the most useful one
according to the significance of the predictors variables and adjusted coefficient of
determination to predict 'Phone' time.
9) Using the best model chosen in 8), give the predicted time an AIMS student spends
watching his/her phone per day for a student who spends 30 minutes on social networks
per day, has a happiness score of 8, walks 2 kilometers a day and has an Instagram ratio
of 2.1.
10) Using the best model chosen in 8), give the predicted time an AIMS student spends
watching his/her phone per day for a student who spends 30 minutes on social networks
per day, has a happiness score of 8, walks 2 kilometers a day and has an Instagram ratio
of 0.4.
